Update ebpf doc (#12503)
netdata/netdata: collectors/ebpf.plugin/README.md

# eBPF monitoring with Netdata

> The Netdata Agent provides many [eBPF](https://ebpf.io/what-is-ebpf/) programs to help you troubleshoot and debug how applications that interact with the Linux kernel. The `ebpf.plugin` uses [tracepoints or kprobes](#data-collection) to collect a wide array of high value data about the host that would otherwise be impossible to capture. 

Author: @kickoke, please, update the next line from 

`The `ebpf.plugin` uses [tracepoints or kprobes](#data-collection)`

to

The `ebpf.plugin` uses [tracepoints, trampoline, and kprobes](#data-collection)

>❗ eBPF monitoring only works on Linux systems and with specific Linux kernels, including all kernels newer than `4.11.0`, and all kernels on CentOS 7.6 or later. For kernels older than `4.11.0`, improved support is in active development.

This document provides all details about the `ebpf.plugin`.
For hands-on configuration and troubleshooting tips see our [tutorial on troubleshooting apps with eBPF metrics](/docs/guides/troubleshoot/monitor-debug-applications-ebpf.md).

<figure>
  <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1153921/74746434-ad6a1e00-5222-11ea-858a-a7882617ae02.png" alt="An example of VFS charts, made possible by the eBPF collector plugin" />
  <figcaption>An example of virtual file system (VFS) charts made possible by the eBPF collector plugin.</figcaption>
</figure>

<a id="data-collection"> </a>
## How Netdata collects data using probes and tracepoints

Netdata uses the following two features from the Linux kernel to run eBPF programs:

> - Kprobes and return probes (`kretprobe`): Probes can insert virtually into any kernel instruction. When eBPF runs in

Author: We also use [trampoline](https://lwn.net/Articles/804937/), but we are still integrating it with our documentation, should we wait the integration to finish? Or is it better to wait  we merge everything?

Reviewer: @thiagoftsm 
1. Could you clarify what you mean by "you're still integrating it with the documentation"? 
2. If you feel ready, please add a short explanation about trampoline in line 30. :)

Author: 1. We did not add trampoline for all threads, so this is still a WIP, and in normal situation we update documentation when the feature is merged.
2. I pushed a commit adding trampolines, because we already have them for some threads.

Reviewer: Thanks, that's good to know!

    sync_file_range = yes
```

### Filesystem configuration

The filesystem configuration has specific options to disable monitoring for filesystems; by default, all filesystems are
monitored.

```conf
[filesystem]
    btrfsdist = yes
    ext4dist = yes
    nfsdist = yes
    xfsdist = yes
    zfsdist = yes
```

The ebpf program `nfsdist` monitors only `nfs` mount points.

## Troubleshooting

If the eBPF collector does not work, you can troubleshoot it by running the `ebpf.plugin` command and investigating its
output.

```bash
cd /usr/libexec/netdata/plugins.d/
sudo su -s /bin/bash ./ebpf.plugin
```

You can also use `grep` to search the Agent's `error.log` for messages related to eBPF monitoring.

```bash
grep -i ebpf /var/log/netdata/error.log
```

### Confirm kernel compatibility

The eBPF collector only works on Linux systems and with specific Linux kernels. We support all kernels more recent than
`4.11.0`, and all kernels on CentOS 7.6 or later.

You can run our helper script to determine whether your system can support eBPF monitoring.

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/netdata/kernel-collector/master/tools/check-kernel-config.sh | sudo bash
```

> If this script returns no output, your system is ready to compile and run the eBPF collector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# eBPF monitoring with Netdata

The Netdata Agent provides many [eBPF](https://ebpf.io/what-is-ebpf/) programs to help you troubleshoot and debug how applications that interact with the Linux kernel. The `ebpf.plugin` uses [tracepoints, trampoline, and2 kprobes](#data-collection) to collect a wide array of high value data about the host that would otherwise be impossible to capture. 

> ❗ eBPF monitoring only works on Linux systems and with specific Linux kernels, including all kernels newer than `4.11.0`, and all kernels on CentOS 7.6 or later. For kernels older than `4.11.0`, improved support is in active development.

> This document provides all details about the `ebpf.plugin`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document provides comprehensive details about the `ebpf.plugin`.
```

    the `apps.plugin` integration. Note that this program will show application charts regardless of whether apps
    integration is turned on or off.

You can also enable the following eBPF programs:

-   `cachestat`: Netdata's eBPF data collector creates charts about the memory page cache. When the integration with
    [`apps.plugin`](/collectors/apps.plugin/README.md) is enabled, this collector creates charts for the whole host _and_
    for each application.
-   `dcstat` : This eBPF program creates charts that show information about file access using directory cache. It appends
    `kprobes` for `lookup_fast()` and `d_lookup()` to identify if files are inside directory cache, outside and files are
    not found.
-   `disk` : This eBPF program creates charts that show information about disk latency independent of filesystem.
-   `filesystem` : This eBPF program creates charts that show information about some filesystem latency.
-   `swap` : This eBPF program creates charts that show information about swap access.
-   `mdflush`: This eBPF program creates charts that show information about
    multi-device software flushes.

### Configuring eBPF threads

> You can configure each thread of the eBPF data collector. @thiagoftsm Can you give some details why/ when you should configure a thread? 

Reviewer 2: Looks like we have a comment that snuck in to the main text. 

```suggestion
You can configure each thread of the eBPF data collector. @thiagoftsm Can you give some details why/ when you should configure a thread? 
```

Reviewer: Good catch! 
@thiagoftsm Could you have a look?

#### `[network connections]`

You can configure the information shown on `outbound` and `inbound` charts with the settings in this section.

```conf
[network connections]
    maximum dimensions = 500
    resolve hostname ips = no
    ports = 1-1024 !145 !domain
    hostnames = !example.com
    ips = !127.0.0.1/8 10.0.0.0/8 172.16.0.0/12 192.168.0.0/16 fc00::/7
```

When you define a `ports` setting, Netdata will collect network metrics for that specific port. For example, if you
write `ports = 19999`, Netdata will collect only connections for itself. The `hostnames` setting accepts
[simple patterns](/libnetdata/simple_pattern/README.md). The `ports`, and `ips` settings accept negation (`!`) to deny
specific values or asterisk alone to define all values.

In the above example, Netdata will collect metrics for all ports between 1 and 443, with the exception of 53 (domain)
and 145.

The following options are available:

-   `ports`: Define the destination ports for Netdata to monitor.
-   `hostnames`: The list of hostnames that can be resolved to an IP address.
-   `ips`: The IP or range of IPs that you want to monitor. You can use IPv4 or IPv6 addresses, use dashes to define a

>     range of IPs, or use CIDR values. The default behavior is to only collect data for private IP addresses, but this can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    range of IPs, or use CIDR values. By default, only data for private IP addresses is collected, but this can
```

    be changed with the `ips` setting.

By default, Netdata displays up to 500 dimensions on network connection charts. If there are more possible dimensions,
they will be bundled into the `other` dimension. You can increase the number of shown dimensions by changing
the `maximum dimensions` setting.

The dimensions for the traffic charts are created using the destination IPs of the sockets by default. This can be
changed setting `resolve hostname ips = yes` and restarting Netdata, after this Netdata will create dimensions using
the `hostnames` every time that is possible to resolve IPs to their hostnames.

#### `[service name]`

Netdata uses the list of services in `/etc/services` to plot network connection charts. If this file does not contain
the name for a particular service you use in your infrastructure, you will need to add it to the `[service name]`
section.

For example, Netdata's default port (`19999`) is not listed in `/etc/services`. To associate that port with the Netdata
service in network connection charts, and thus see the name of the service instead of its port, define it:

```conf
[service name]
    19999 = Netdata
```

### Sync configuration

> The sync configuration has specific options to disable monitoring for syscalls, as default option all syscalls are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The sync configuration has specific options to disable monitoring for syscalls.  All syscalls are by default.
```

> monitored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```conf
[syscalls]
    sync = yes
    msync = yes
    fsync = yes
    fdatasync = yes
    syncfs = yes
    sync_file_range = yes
```

### Filesystem configuration

> The filesystem configuration has specific options to disable monitoring for filesystems, by default all filesystems are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The filesystem configuration has specific options to disable monitoring for filesystems; by default, all filesystems are
```

monitored.

```conf
[filesystem]
    btrfsdist = yes
    ext4dist = yes
    nfsdist = yes
    xfsdist = yes
    zfsdist = yes
```

The ebpf program `nfsdist` monitors only `nfs` mount points.

## Troubleshooting

If the eBPF collector does not work, you can troubleshoot it by running the `ebpf.plugin` command and investigating its
output.

```bash
cd /usr/libexec/netdata/plugins.d/
sudo su -s /bin/bash ./ebpf.plugin
```

You can also use `grep` to search the Agent's `error.log` for messages related to eBPF monitoring.

```bash
grep -i ebpf /var/log/netdata/error.log
```

### Confirm kernel compatibility

The eBPF collector only works on Linux systems and with specific Linux kernels. We support all kernels more recent than
`4.11.0`, and all kernels on CentOS 7.6 or later.

You can run our helper script to determine whether your system can support eBPF monitoring.

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/netdata/kernel-collector/master/tools/check-kernel-config.sh | sudo bash
```

> If this script returns no output, your system is ready to compile and run the eBPF collector.

Reviewer 2: I might put this on top of the script and say "If the following helper script returns no output..."

Reviewer: Agree!

section.

For example, Netdata's default port (`19999`) is not listed in `/etc/services`. To associate that port with the Netdata
service in network connection charts, and thus see the name of the service instead of its port, define it:

```conf
[service name]
    19999 = Netdata
```

### Sync configuration

The sync configuration has specific options to disable monitoring for syscalls, as default option all syscalls are
monitored.

```conf
[syscalls]
    sync = yes
    msync = yes
    fsync = yes
    fdatasync = yes
    syncfs = yes
    sync_file_range = yes
```

### Filesystem configuration

The filesystem configuration has specific options to disable monitoring for filesystems, by default all filesystems are
monitored.

```conf
[filesystem]
    btrfsdist = yes
    ext4dist = yes
    nfsdist = yes
    xfsdist = yes
    zfsdist = yes
```

The ebpf program `nfsdist` monitors only `nfs` mount points.

## Troubleshooting

If the eBPF collector does not work, you can troubleshoot it by running the `ebpf.plugin` command and investigating its
output.

```bash
cd /usr/libexec/netdata/plugins.d/
sudo su -s /bin/bash netdata

> ./ebpf.plugin

Author: `ebpf.plugin` also needs special permission to run, because it is monitoring kernel metrics, please, add `sudo su -s` for it too.

Why are you adding `netdata` here ?

Reviewer: Hi @thiagoftsm , 
I think this section got marked as "green - added" because I did cut and paste a lot of things. 

I didn't touch this code example and I'm not exactly sure why it looks like this. 

Feel free to tell me what you would expect to see here, so I can learn from you. :)

- [CentOS](https://wiki.centos.org/HowTos/Custom_Kernel)
- [Arch Linux](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Kernel/Traditional_compilation)
- [Slackware](https://docs.slackware.com/howtos:slackware_admin:kernelbuilding)

### Mount `debugfs` and `tracefs`

The eBPF collector also requires both the `tracefs` and `debugfs` filesystems. Try mounting the `tracefs` and `debugfs`
filesystems using the commands below:

```bash
sudo mount -t debugfs nodev /sys/kernel/debug
sudo mount -t tracefs nodev /sys/kernel/tracing
```

If they are already mounted, you will see an error. You can also configure your system's `/etc/fstab` configuration to
mount these filesystems on startup. More information can be found in
the [ftrace documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/trace/ftrace.txt).

## Charts

The eBPF collector creates charts on different menus, like System Overview, Memory, MD arrays, Disks, Filesystem,
Mount Points, Networking Stack, systemd Services, and Applications.

The collector stores the actual value inside of its process, but charts only show the difference between the values
collected in the previous and current seconds.

### System overview

> Not all charts within the System Overview menu are enabled by default, because they add around 100ns overhead for each

Author: A suggestion for we have a more accurate information:

`because when `kprobes` are used they add around 100ns overhead for each`

We are already merging tracing that will reduce this overhead.

 the kernel allocates a new entry and copies data from the disk. Netdata calculates the percentage of accessed files that are cached on
 memory. The ratio is calculated counting the accessed cached pages
 (without counting [dirty pages](#dirty-pages) and pages added because of read misses) divided by total access without dirty pages.

\_\_________<ins>Number of accessed cached pages</ins>__________

Number of total accessed pages - dirty pages - missed pages

The chart `cachestat_ratio` shows how processes are accessing page cache. In a normal scenario, we expect values around
100%, which means that the majority of the work on the machine is processed in memory. To calculate the ratio, Netdata
attaches `kprobes` for kernel functions:

- `add_to_page_cache_lru`: Page addition.
- `mark_page_accessed`: Access to cache.
- `account_page_dirtied`: Dirty (modified) pages.
- `mark_buffer_dirty`: Writes to page cache.

#### Page cache misses

A page cache miss means that a page was not inside memory when the process tried to access it. This chart shows the
result of the difference for calls between functions `add_to_page_cache_lru` and `account_page_dirtied`.

> #### File sync

Author: Synchronization and Page Cache monitors data in memory, but they are provided by different threads, should we use different levels for them?

Reviewer: Yes, sounds good. Just to clarify a bit: By which criteria do we sort this big list?

Once I know the criteria, I can take another look and find a logical layout for the whole document. 

Are we sorting by thread, and the threads appear in alphabetical order?

Author: We were sorting data according the dashboard visualization. Both `Synchronization (eBPF)`  and `Page Cache(eBPF)` are inside `Memory` submenu.

   ```

3. Enable the collector by scrolling down to the `[plugins]` section. Uncomment the line `ebpf` (not
`ebpf_process`) and set it to `yes`.

   ```conf
   [plugins]
      ebpf = yes
   ```

### Configure the eBPF collector

You can configure the eBPF collector's behavior to fine-tune which metrics you receive and [optimize performance](#performance opimization).

To edit the `ebpf.d.conf`:

1. Navigate to the [Netdata config directory](/docs/configure/nodes.md#the-netdata-config-directory).
    ```bash
    cd /etc/netdata
    ```
2. Use the [`edit-config`](/docs/configure/nodes.md#use-edit-config-to-edit-configuration-files) script to edit [`ebpf.d.conf`](https://github.com/netdata/netdata/blob/master/collectors/ebpf.plugin/ebpf.d.conf).

   ```bash
   ./edit-config ebpf.d.conf
   ```
   You can now edit the behavior of the eBPF collector. The following sections describe each configuration option in detail.

### `[global]` configuration options

The `[global]` section defines settings for the whole eBPF collector.

#### eBPF load mode

The collector uses two different eBPF programs. These programs rely on the same functions inside the kernel, but they

> monitor, process, and display different kinds of information.

Author: I suggest to change `process` to `function`, because task is any software or thread, while `function` is what we monitor.

Reviewer: `process` is a verb in this context: "These programs [...] monitor, process and display different kinds of information".

    - Number of times that an error happened to create thread or process. (`task_error`)
- swap
    - Number of calls to `swap_readpage`. (`swap_read_call`)
    - Number of calls to `swap_writepage`. (`swap_write_call`)
- network
    - Number of bytes sent. (`total_bandwidth_sent`)
    - Number of bytes received. (`total_bandwidth_recv`)
    - Number of calls to `tcp_sendmsg`. (`bandwidth_tcp_send`)
    - Number of calls to `tcp_cleanup_rbuf`. (`bandwidth_tcp_recv`)
    - Number of calls to `tcp_retransmit_skb`. (`bandwidth_tcp_retransmit`)
    - Number of calls to `udp_sendmsg`. (`bandwidth_udp_send`)
    - Number of calls to `udp_recvmsg`. (`bandwidth_udp_recv`)
- file access
    - Number of calls to open files. (`file_open`)
    - Number of calls to open files that returned errors. (`open_error`)
    - Number of files closed. (`file_closed`)
    - Number of calls to close files that returned errors. (`file_error_closed`)
- vfs
    - Number of calls to `vfs_unlink`. (`file_deleted`)
    - Number of calls to `vfs_write`. (`vfs_write_call`)
    - Number of calls to write a file that returned errors. (`vfs_write_error`)

>     - Number of calls to `vfs_read`. (`vfs_read_call`)

Author: A suggestion, considering how we show data. It is better to move `vfs_read_error`for the line `179`.

Reviewer: Agreed!

- `dcstat` : This eBPF program creates charts that show information about file access using directory cache. It appends
  `kprobes` for `lookup_fast()` and `d_lookup()` to identify if files are inside directory cache, outside and files are
  not found.
- `disk` : This eBPF program creates charts that show information about disk latency independent of filesystem.
- `filesystem` : This eBPF program creates charts that show information about some filesystem latency.
- `swap` : This eBPF program creates charts that show information about swap access.
- `mdflush`: This eBPF program creates charts that show information about
  multi-device software flushes.

### Configuring eBPF threads

You can configure each thread of the eBPF data collector. @thiagoftsm Can you give some details why/ when you should configure a thread? 

To configure an eBPF thread:

1. Navigate to the [Netdata config directory](/docs/configure/nodes.md#the-netdata-config-directory).
    ```bash
    cd /etc/netdata
    ```
2. Use the [`edit-config`](/docs/configure/nodes.md#use-edit-config-to-edit-configuration-files) script to edit a thread configuration file. The following configuration files are available:

>    - `network.conf`: Configuration for the [`network viewer` thread](#network-configuration). This config file overwrites the global options and also

Author: Please, remove the word `viewer`, because this is still a work in progress. We have now a `network thread`.

#### Page cache ratio

When the processor needs to read or write a location in main memory, it checks for a corresponding entry in the page cache.

> If the entry is there, a page cache hit has occurred, and the read is from the cache. If the entry is not there,

Author: yes, I accepted the suggestion.

> a page cache miss has occurred, and the kernel allocates a new entry and copies in data from the disk. Netdata calculates

Author: No, I used a generic word, because we cannot specify exactly what is stored, unless we go to low-level.

 the percentage of accessed files that are cached on memory. The ratio is calculated counting the accessed cached pages
 (without counting dirty pages and pages added because of read misses) divided by total access without dirty pages.

> 

Author: Thank you very much, I loved this suggestion

#### Dirty pages

> Pages in the page cache modified after being brought in are called “dirty pages.” Since non-dirty pages in the page cache

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A "dirty page" is a pages in the page cache that was modified after being created. Since non-dirty pages in the page cache
```

 have identical copies in secondary storage (e.g. hard disk drive or solid-state drive), discarding and reusing their space
 is much quicker than paging out application memory, and is often preferred over flushing the dirty pages into secondary storage
 and reusing their space.

On `cachestat_dirties` Netdata demonstrates the number of pages that were modified. This chart shows the number of calls
to the function `mark_buffer_dirty`.

> #### Page cache hits

Reviewer: I would explain this section as the first, then dirty pages, and then the page cache ratio.

Author: I adjusted the order.

-   `shmget`: Runs when [`shmget`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/shmget.2.html) is called.
-   `shmat`: Runs when [`shmat`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/shmat.2.html) is called.
-   `shmdt`: Runs when [`shmdt`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/shmat.2.html) is called.
-   `shmctl`: Runs when [`shmctl`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/shmctl.2.html) is called.

### Memory

In the memory submenu the eBPF plugin creates two submenus **page cache** and **synchronization** with the following
organization:

-   Page Cache
    -   Page cache ratio
    -   Dirty pages
    -   Page cache hits
    -   Page cache misses
-   Synchronization
    -   File sync
    -   Memory map sync
    -   File system sync
    -   File range sync

#### Page cache hits

When the processor needs to read or write a location in main memory, it checks for a corresponding entry in the page cache.
 If the entry is there, a page cache hit has occurred and the read is from the cache.

A page cache hit is when the page cache is successfully accessed with a read operation. We do not count pages that were
added relatively recently.

#### Dirty pages

> A "dirty page" is a pages in the page cache that was modified after being created. Since non-dirty pages in the page cache

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A "dirty page" is a page in the page cache that was modified after being created. Since non-dirty pages in the page cache
```
